Why do Apple and Nike never worry about
algorithm changes? Because they built
something most brands refuse to invest
in, a real community. It's the hardest
marketing strategy to execute. It
requires patience, consistency, and zero
shortcuts. But once it's built, your
customer acquisition cost drops, your
retention skyrockets, and you own the
relationship, not the platform. I'm Neil
Patel. I run one of the largest
independent marketing agencies in the
world, and in this video, I'm going to
break down the three simple steps to
building a community that actually
works. Not one built on hype, expensive
parties, or rented attention. Chapter
one.
Most marketers think they're building a
community when they're actually just
renting an audience. Here's the reality.
I see companies every single day throw
money at what's called community
building. They sponsor Formula One, they
host parties at conferences, they
created Discord servers that nobody
uses. They think that a Slack channel
that has 5,000 people, even though
nobody's talking in it, is a win. But
here's what they're missing. Community
isn't about the size of the group or how
impressive the venue is. It's about one
thing. Do your members help each other,
or do they just consume content from
you? Because if the only interaction
happening is people watching your posts,
liking your updates, and waiting for
your next announcement, that's an
audience. And audiences are rented. The
platforms control who sees what. One
algorithm change, and your reach is cut
in half. One policy shift, and your
distribution disappears. Here's how you
know the difference. If Instagram
disappeared tomorrow, would your
business survive? If the answer is no,
you don't own anything. You're borrowing
attention from a platform that can take
it back whenever they want. Whether it's
Instagram, TikTok, YouTube, it's the
same thing. You don't want to rely on
just one platform. Real community
survives platform changes because the
relationship exists independent of the
algorithm. Chapter two.
The best example of real community
didn't come from a marketing team. They
happened from users who wanted to help
each other. WordPress is one of the
largest blogging platforms in the world.
They created something called WordCamps.
These are events, but not the kind that
you're thinking. They're not parties.
They're not networking mixers where
people get drunk and exchange business
cards. They're problem-solving sessions
where WordPress users help other
WordPress users fix real issues. Someone
shows up with a broken plugin, someone
else in the room has already solved that
exact problem. They sit down together
and fix it. No sales pitches, no
upsells, just people helping people
because they all share and love the same
ecosystem. And here's what happened.
These users became fiercely loyal, not
because WordPress had the best product.
There are plenty of competitors, but
because WordPress created an environment
where members felt invested. They
weren't just customers, they were
contributors. That's the psychological
shift most brands never make. When your
customers feel like they're part of
something bigger than the transaction,
retention skyrockets. When they help
each other, they're not just buying from
you, they're buying into a system
they've helped build. And data backs
this up. According to our recent
research, 69% of marketers are
increasing their community building
budgets in 2026. Not maintaining them,
increasing them. Because they're finally
realizing what the top brands like Apple
and Nike figured out years ago. Owned
relationships compound, rented attention
doesn't. This is why community is the
hardest marketing strategy. It requires
you to stop being the center of
attention and start being the
facilitator. Chapter three. Step one,
define the shared problem, not your
product. If you're organizing your
community around your product, you've
already failed. Here's the mistake I
see. A company launches a CRM tool and
immediately creates a CRM user group. No
one shows up. Or worse, people join and
never engage because there's nothing to
talk about except feature updates and
release notes. Compare that to
organizing around the actual problem
your customers face. Don't create a
group for people who use our project
management software, create a group for
small teams struggling to stay aligned
without endless meetings. Same
customers, completely different
conversation. Because now, you're not
talking about your tool, you're talking
about the pain point that led them to
your tool in the first place. And when
people have a real problem in common,
they want to help each other solve it.
This is what WordPress did right. They
didn't organize around people who use
WordPress, they organized around people
building websites and running into
technical problems. The product became
the vehicle, not the topic. So here's
the first step. Stop thinking about your
product category. Start thinking about
the shared challenge that brought your
customers to you. That's what creates
real conversation. That's what makes
people show up repeatedly. And that's
what turns a group of individuals into a
community that actually matters. Chapter
four. Step two, creating small,
reoccurring gatherings, not big events.
The brands spending millions on
conference booths are building
visibility, not loyalty. Let me be clear
about something. Sponsoring a major
event, throwing a huge party, getting
your logo on a stadium, that's not
community building. That's brand
awareness. And brand awareness is not
the same thing as owned relationships.
Here's why. At a big event, people show
up for a spectacle. They're there for
the free drinks, entertainment, and
networking opportunity. But the second
the event ends, so does the connection.
There's no ongoing interaction, no real
relationship, just a logo they saw and
maybe a business card they'll never
follow up on. Real community happens in
small groups. 10 or 15 people in a room.
Or a Slack channel where the same 30
members show up every week to help each
other. Or monthly roundtables where your
best customers talk through their
biggest challenges together. The key is
repetition and intimacy. You're not
trying to impress 500 people at once.
You're trying to connect 15 people over
and over again until they start helping
each other without you in the room.
That's the shift. When your community
members start solving each others
problems, your role changes from expert
to facilitator. And that's when the
economics flip. Because now, you're not
the only one creating value, your
members are doing it for each other.
This is why community gets cheaper over
time while every other marketing channel
gets more expensive. You're building a
system that scales through peer-to-peer
interaction, not your time. Chapter
five. Step three, facilitate
member-to-member value. The hardest
part. If you're the only expert in the
room, you don't have a community, you
have a fan club. This is where most
brands fail. They create a space, they
define the problem, they bring people
together, and then they make it all
about themselves. Every question gets
answered by the brand. Every
conversation gets redirected back to the
product. Every piece of value comes from
the company, not the members. And here's
the problem, that doesn't scale, that
doesn't create loyalty, and it doesn't
become a competitive advantage. Real
community happens when members help
members. When someone asks a question
and three other members jump in with
answers before you even see it. When
people start tagging each other in
threads because they know who has the
expertise. When your most engaged
members become the go-to experts in your
space. Here's how to make this happen.
First, stop answering every question
yourself. Let the silence sit for a
minute. Let your members step up.
Second, publicly recognize the people
who contribute. Highlight their answers.
Give them roles, titles, recognition.
Make helpfulness visible and valuable.
Third, and this is critical, measure
member-to-member interaction, not just
engagement with your content. If all
your metrics are tracking how people
respond to you, you're building an
audience. If you're tracking how people
respond to each other, you're building a
community. This is the hardest step
because it requires for you to give up
your ego. You have to let go of being
the center of attention. You have to
trust that your members can create value
without you. But when you do, something
incredible happens. Retention skyrockets
because people aren't just getting value
from your product, they're getting value
from the relationships they've built.
Customer acquisition costs drop because
your members start referring other
people who have the same problem. And
you own the relationship because it's
not happening on Instagram or LinkedIn
or YouTube, it's happening in a space
you control. Chapter six. Why difficulty
is the entire point. If it's easy to
start, it's easy to copy. And if it's
easy to copy, it's not a competitive
advantage. Here's the economic reality
of marketing in 2026. Paid ads, easy to
start, everyone's running them. No
barrier to entry, no moat. Going viral,
great for a week, then it's gone. SEO,
used to be a moat, now it's
commoditized. The only strategies that
create lasting advantage are the ones
that require time, patience, and
consistent effort. Things that most
companies won't invest in. That's why
community is your biggest competitive
advantage. Not because it's complicated,
but because it's hard. It requires you
to think long-term when everyone else is
optimizing for the next quarter. It
requires you to facilitate relationships
when everyone else is broadcasting
content. It requires you to give up
control when everyone else is trying to
be the hero. And because it's hard,
almost nobody does it. Which means, when
you do, you're operating in a completely
different game than your competitors.
While they're fighting over ad costs and
algorithm changes, you're building
something they can't replicate in six
months. You're building loyalty that
they can't buy. You're building
economics that compound over time
instead of getting worse. This is how
Apple and Nike sleep at night when
Instagram changes algorithm, because
they don't need the algorithm to do
well. They own the relationship, and
that's the only asset in marketing that
compounds forever. And look, I've done
it myself at NP Digital. We have a
massive community that helps each other.
Not just with our products like
Ubersuggest and Answer the Public, but
for topics like SEO and paid ads and
even social media marketing. And if you
want us to help you build a community,
check us out at npdigital.com.
So here's the truth. Most brands won't
build this. It's too hard. It takes too
long. There's no viral shortcut. And
that's exactly why it's your
opportunity. When your competitors are
optimizing the same ads on the same
platform, you're building something they
can't copy quickly. You're building the
one marketing channel you actually own.
Now, if you want to understand how
search and discovery are changing across
every platform, not just social media,
watch this video next. I'll show you why
the brands that win aren't just chasing
algorithms. They're building assets
algorithms can't control.